**Document number**: P1050R0  
**Date**: 2018-05-07  
**Reply-to**: John McFarlane, [fixed-point@john.mcfarlane.name](mailto:fixed-point@john.mcfarlane.name)  
**Audience**: SG6, LEWG  

# Fractional Numeric Type

## Abstract

This paper introduces a fractional number type which stores pairs of integer numerators and denominators.
It avoids precision loss commonly associated with the storage of single-number quotients.
It also helps express intent when initializing fixed-point types with the results of division operations.

## Introduction

Rational numbers provide a headache for digital number types such as the fundamental scalars. 
We already have `std::ratio` -- mostly as a necessary way of expressing different static scales in `std::chrono`. 
There has previously been discussion of sophisticated, general purpose bounded 
[[P0101](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0101r0.html#BoundOther)] and unbounded 
[[P0101](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0101r0.html#UnboundRational)] rationals. 
Boost has a rational type [[Boost](https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/release/libs/rational/rational.html)].

This paper proposes a fractional type that is compatible with the compositional approach detailed in 
[[P0554](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2017/p0554r0.html)]. 
As such it is designed to provide a zero-overhead abstraction over pairs of integers 
while also being an expressive, user-friendly, general-purpose statically-sized number type 
when combined with other numeric components.

The reason for proposing a fractional type at this time is because it serves a specific role 
in initialization of the fixed-point numbers described in [[P0037](http://wg21.link/p0037)].

## Motivation

Class template, `fixed_point<>` from [[P0037](http://wg21.link/p0037)] 
can be initialized with integer and floating-point values. 
It is desirable that `fixed_point<>` values also be the quotient in a division operation. 
A `divide` function was previously proposed in [P0037]:

    auto a = divide(1, 3);

Straight away the question arises: what should be the resolution of `a`? The solution proposed in 
[[P0106](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0106r0.html#basic_operations)] is to determine the 
number of fractional digits from the number of fractional digits in the numerator and integer digits in the denominator.
In the example above, `a` has 31 fractional digits because literal, `3`, has 31 integer digits. 
The result has value, 0.333333333022892475128173828125.

This solution is problematic when one considers all of the ways that `1` or `3` can be represented. 
For example, using `elastic_integer<>` [[P0828](https://github.com/johnmcfarlane/papers/blob/master/wg21/p0828r0.md)] as the inputs

    auto b = divide(elastic_integer<1>{1}, elastic_integer<2>{3}); 
    
results in a `fixed_point` type with only 2 fractional digits. 
The resultant approximation of `1/3` is `0.25`. 
This is unlikely to be the desired result in most cases. 

Specifying the output type is one solution:

    auto c = divide<fixed_point<int, -16>>(1, 3);
    auto d = divide<fixed_point<int, -16>>(elastic_integer<1>{1}, elastic_integer<2>{3}); 

Both `c` and `d` have values, `0.3333282470703125`. 
However, it is not entirely clear that introducing a named function specifically for this purpose is necessary, 
nor whether the interface is sufficiently intuitive.

By introducing a fractional type, `fraction`

    template<class Numerator, class Denominator>
    struct fraction {
        // ...
        
        Numerator numerator;
        Denominator denominator;
    };
    
we can express the same intent using only types:

    auto a = fixed_point{fraction{1, 3}};
    auto b = fixed_point{fraction{elastic_integer<1>{1}, elastic_integer<2>{3}}};
    auto c = fixed_point<int, -16>{fraction{1, 3}};
    auto d = fixed_point<int, -16>{fraction{elastic_integer<1>{1}, elastic_integer<2>{3}}};

## Synopsis

    template<class Numerator, class Denominator>
    struct fraction {
        using numerator_type = Numerator;
        using denominator_type = Denominator;

        explicit constexpr fraction(const Numerator& n, const Denominator& d);
        explicit constexpr fraction(const Numerator& n);
        
        template<class Scalar, _impl::enable_if_t<std::is_floating_point<Scalar>::value, int> = 0>
        explicit constexpr operator Scalar() const;
        
        numerator_type numerator;
        denominator_type denominator = 1;
    };

    template<class Numerator, class Denominator>
    fraction(const Numerator& n, const Denominator&)
    -> fraction<Numerator, Denominator>;

    template<class Numerator>
    fraction(Numerator const& n)
    -> fraction<Numerator, int>;

    template<class Numerator, class Denominator>
    constexpr auto reduce(fraction<Numerator, Denominator> const& f);

    template<class LhsNumerator, class LhsDenominator, class RhsNumerator, class RhsDenominator>
    constexpr auto operator+(
            fraction<LhsNumerator, LhsDenominator> const& lhs,
            fraction<RhsNumerator, RhsDenominator> const& rhs)
    -> decltype(make_fraction(
            lhs.numerator*rhs.denominator+rhs.numerator*lhs.denominator, lhs.denominator*rhs.denominator));
                        
    template<class LhsNumerator, class LhsDenominator, class RhsNumerator, class RhsDenominator>
    constexpr auto operator-(
            fraction<LhsNumerator, LhsDenominator> const& lhs,
            fraction<RhsNumerator, RhsDenominator> const& rhs)
    -> decltype(make_fraction(
            lhs.numerator*rhs.denominator-rhs.numerator*lhs.denominator, lhs.denominator*rhs.denominator));
            
    template<class LhsNumerator, class LhsDenominator, class RhsNumerator, class RhsDenominator>
    constexpr auto operator*(
            fraction<LhsNumerator, LhsDenominator> const& lhs,
            fraction<RhsNumerator, RhsDenominator> const& rhs)
    -> decltype(make_fraction(lhs.numerator*rhs.numerator, lhs.denominator*rhs.denominator));
    
    template<class LhsNumerator, class LhsDenominator, class RhsNumerator, class RhsDenominator>
    constexpr auto operator/(
            fraction<LhsNumerator, LhsDenominator> const& lhs,
            fraction<RhsNumerator, RhsDenominator> const& rhs)
    -> decltype(make_fraction(lhs.numerator*rhs.denominator, lhs.denominator*rhs.numerator));
    
    template<class LhsNumerator, class LhsDenominator, class RhsNumerator, class RhsDenominator>
    constexpr auto operator==(
            fraction<LhsNumerator, LhsDenominator> const& lhs,
            fraction<RhsNumerator, RhsDenominator> const& rhs);
            
    template<class LhsNumerator, class LhsDenominator, class RhsNumerator, class RhsDenominator>
    constexpr auto operator!=(
            fraction<LhsNumerator, LhsDenominator> const& lhs,
            fraction<RhsNumerator, RhsDenominator> const& rhs);

## Reference Implementation

`fraction` is implemented as part of [the CNL library](https://github.com/johnmcfarlane/cnl)
([header](https://github.com/johnmcfarlane/cnl/blob/develop/include/cnl/fractional.h),
[tests](https://github.com/johnmcfarlane/cnl/blob/develop/src/test/fractional.cpp),
[fixed_point integration](https://github.com/johnmcfarlane/cnl/blob/develop/src/test/fixed_point/fractional_ctor.h)).
