**Document number**: P1751R0  
**Date**: 2019-06-16  
**Reply-to**: John McFarlane, [wg21@john.mcfarlane.name](mailto:wg21@john.mcfarlane.name)  
**Audience**: SG6, LEWGI

# Numeric Type Families

## Introduction

This paper introduces the notion of numeric type families which play an
important role in facilitating efficient, extensible, generic numeric code. It
explains what they are, how they are used and proposes library facilities for
accessing and manipulating them.

## Definition

The first two paragraphs of [[basic.fundamental](http://eel.is/c++draft/basic.types#basic.fundamental)] in
[[N4810](chrome-extension://oemmndcbldboiebfnladdacbdfmadadm/http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2019/n4810.pdf)]
introduce the *signed integer types* and the *unsigned integer types*
respectively. Together, these constitute the *fundamental integer type family*.

They are supported by optional library aliases (`int32_t` etc.) which provide
width guarantees and by type traits (`is_signed`, `make_signed` and
`make_unsigned`) which allow transformations between them.

Outside the standard, other numeric type families exist. A recurring pattern is
that their members vary in width and signedness. Some even exhibit a 1-to-1
mapping with the fundamental integer type family. For example, the
[`SafeInt`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/safeint/safeint-class?view=vs-2019)
class is parameterised on a fundamental integer type, e.g.:

```c++
SafeInt<int> a{42};
```

Other families have continuous ranges of widths. For example,
[`boost::multiprecision::number`](https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_66_0/libs/multiprecision/doc/html/boost_multiprecision/tut/ints/cpp_int.html)
has a width parameter:

```c++
number<cpp_int_backend<32>> b{42};
```

[[example](https://godbolt.org/z/-NXgTn)]

## Applications

### Example 1: Generic Arithmetic Functions

There is an increasing demand to make numeric types easier to use in generic
code. Consider a library which provides overflow-resistant
arithmetic[:](https://godbolt.org/z/CVHfa3)

```c++
namespace acme {
    // avoids negative overflow when b>a
    auto minus(uint32_t a, uint32_t b) {
        return int64_t{a}-b;
    }

    // avoids positive overflow when product exceeds range of the operands
    auto multiply(uint32_t a, uint32_t b) {
        return uint64_t{a}*b;
    }
}
```

Next consider all overloads of the above functions necessary to cover the
fundamental integers.
Finally, consider the overloads necessary to cover third-party integers such as
the SafeInt and Boost.Multiprecision types. Clearly, function templates are
needed.

One facility which would cover the case for fundamental integers is
parameterisation of width or digits. We already have `numeric_limits::digits`
which is helpful in calculating the range of a number. A complementary setter is
frequently requested as a standard library addition.

Boost provides [facilities](https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_66_0/libs/integer/doc/html/boost_integer/integer.html)
for chosing a fundamental signed or unsigned type given a number of bits, e.g.:

```c++
//  signed
template<int Bits>
struct int_t
{
    /* Member exact may or may not be defined depending upon Bits */
    typedef implementation-defined-type  exact;
    typedef implementation-defined-type  least;
    typedef int_fast_t<least>::fast      fast;
};

//  unsigned
template<int Bits>
struct uint_t
{
  /* Member exact may or may not be defined depending upon Bits */
  typedef implementation-defined-type  exact;
  typedef implementation-defined-type  least;
  typedef int_fast_t<least>::fast      fast;
};
```

This is a step in the right direction and helps out with the `minus` function in
our library[:](https://godbolt.org/z/0fvKtx)

```c++
namespace acme {
    // avoids negative overflow when b>a
    template<class Operand>
    auto minus(Operand a, Operand b) {
        using result = boost::int_t<numeric_limits<Operand>::digits+1>::fast;
        return result{a}-b;
    }

    // avoids positive overflow when product exceeds range of the operands
    auto multiply(uint32_t a, uint32_t b) {
        return uint64_t{a}*b;
    }
}
```

But `multiply` is more awkward: we need signed and unsigned overloads to make
use of `boost::int_t` and `boost::uint_t`. And it still only works for
fundamental integers.

[[P0675](wg21.link/p0675)] proposes a user-customisable metafunction,
`set_digits`, which addresses both of these concerns with a single type
parameter:

```c++
template<class T, int MinDigits>
struct set_digits;
```

Common arguments to `T` are `signed` and
`unsigned`[:](https://godbolt.org/z/iX03YE)

```c++
set_digits_t<unsigned, 5> a{30};  // an unsigned integer with at least 5 digits.
```

Two things are worth noting here:

1. The type returned by this metafunction is the same signedness and **the same
   family** as the input, `T`.
2. The terminology is **digits**, not **bits** or **width**. This is an
   important but subtle distinction: width includes the sign bit but digits does
   not.

Including `set_digits`, [[P0675](https://wg21.link/p0675)] proposes a full set of
user-customizable metafunctions for transforming between types within a family:

* `set_digits` - returns a type with at least the given number of digits
* `digits` - returns the number of digits (equivalent to
  `numeric_limits::digits`)
* `is_signed` - returns true iff `T` is signed (equivalent to
  `numeric_limits::is_signed`)
* `add_signedness` - returns a signed equivalent of `T` (like `make_signed`
  but user-customisable)
* `remove_signedness` - complement to `add_signedness`

Lets see how these helps our `multiply`
function[:](https://godbolt.org/z/1ozBgm)

```c++
namespace acme {
    // avoids negative overflow when b>a
    template<class Operand>
    auto minus(Operand a, Operand b) {
        constexpr auto operand_digits = digits_v<Operand>;
        using signed_operand = add_signedness_t<Operand>;
        using result = set_digits_t<signed_operand, operand_digits+1>;
        return result{a}-b;
    }

    // avoids positive overflow when product exceeds range of the operands
    template<class Operand>
    auto multiply(Operand a, Operand b) {
        constexpr auto operand_digits = digits_v<Operand>;
        using result = set_digits_t<Operand, operand_digits*2>;
        return result{a}*b;
    }
}
```

Now the functions work with all fundamental integers (except the widest ones,
for which there are no valid return types). Better still, we can now provide [a
dab of glue](https://godbolt.org/z/U0H4nU) and pass Boost.Multiprecision types,
among many others.

### Example 2: Generic Arithmetic Types

The above example shows safe — but tedious — named functions which quickly
becomes unreadable. [[P0828](https://wg21.link/p0828)] proposes the same
facility in the form of a numeric type, `elastic_integer`, with a full set of
arithmetic operators:

```c++
template<int MaxDigits, class Narrowest>
class elastic_integer;
```

This makes the same facility far more readable[:](https://godbolt.org/z/qnDIIv)

```c++
// elastic_integer<32, signed>{-1}
auto a{elastic_integer{0U}-elastic_integer{1U}};

// elastic_integer<64, unsigned>{UINT_MAX*UINT_MAX}
auto b{elastic_integer{UINT_MAX}*elastic_integer{UINT_MAX}};
```

### Example 3: Composite Types

In order to be generally useful, `elastic_integer` also specializes the family
metafunctions, e.g.:

```c++
template<int InDigits, class Narrowest, int OutDigits>
struct set_digits<elastic_integer<InDigits, Narrowest>, OutDigits> {
    using type = elastic_integer<OutDigits, Narrowest>;
};
```

Now `elastic_integer` itself can start to become a piece in a larger system
and we begin to build up a vocabulary for describing components and their
interaction. For instance, we can use a 'safe integer' type to wrap — not only
fundamental types as SafeInt does but also — all suitable class-based numeric
types.

[[P0554](http://wg21.link/p0554)] describes an entire system for numeric
composition in which the notion of a family becomes essential.
Introduced in that paper is a more generic alternative to SafeInt called
`overflow_integer`:

```c++
template<class Rep, class OverflowTag = contract_overflow_tag>
class overflow_integer;
```

Once `set_digits` and all the other family metafunctions have been specialized
for `elastic_integer`, it becomes a family which can be plugged into
`overflow_integer`.

Here is a composite type which combines run-time overflow
detection (courtesy of `overflow_integer`) with compile-time overflow
avoidance (courtesy of `elastic_integer`):

```c++
template<
        int MinDigits,
        class Narrowest = signed,
        class OverflowTag = contract_overflow_tag>
using safe_integer =
    overflow_integer<elastic_integer<MinDigits, Narrowest>, OverflowTag>;
```

Such a **composite numeric type** is hard to absorb without some idea of the
families involved:

* `Narrowest` is — by default — a signed member of the fundamental integer
  family. The concrete storage for an instantiation of `safe_integer` will be
  either `int` or something wider than `int`. Swapping this out for `unsigned`
  would give equivalent unsigned behavior. Non-fundamental families are accepted
  but must have the family metafunctions specialized for them.
* `Rep` is the family wrapped by `overflow_integer` and in this case, the choice
  is `elastic_integer<MinDigits, Narrowest>`. Any change to the digits
  or signedness of `overflow_integer` will involve an equivalent change in the
  `elastic_integer` parameters.
* `safe_integer<MinDigits, Narrowest, OverflowTag>` is specialized to become a
  member of the outermost family. A member of that family might be
  `safe_integer<31>` which would give it the same digits and signedness as
  `int32_t`.

## Conclusion

The idea of numeric families is essential to understanding composition of
numeric types. Non-compositional interfaces are characterised by non-type
template parameters, e.g.:

```c++
template<int Digits, bool IsSigned>
struct some_number;
```

Sadly, `some_number`, will always be confined to a single family.

In contrast a type provides an open door to unlimited choices:

```c++
template<class Rep>
struct composable_number;
```

## Acknowledgements

Special thanks to Davis Herring for extensive and invaluable input on this
topic.
