**Document number**: P1832R0  
**Date**: 2019-08-05  
**Reply-to**: John McFarlane, [wg21@john.mcfarlane.name](mailto:wg21@john.mcfarlane.name)  
**Audience**: SG6, SG14, SG15, SG19

# Improving Debug Builds Inline With User Expectation

## Abstract

Some users complain that modern C++ abstractions
make it hard to debug their programs.
This document explores one of the reasons for these complaints and
suggests a possible solution for implementers.

## Introduction

This document is written in response to the assertion that
"non-optimized build performance is important" as stated in the article,
["Modern" C++ Lamentations](https://aras-p.info/blog/2018/12/28/Modern-C-Lamentations/).
The article, written by a game developer, sparked discussion
on [social media](https://twitter.com/aras_p/status/1078682464602726400)
and the [SG14 reflector](https://groups.google.com/a/isocpp.org/d/topic/sg14/Zx3b2rgpYck/discussion)
which did not conclude with concrete action to be taken.

More recently, SG6 and SG14 reviewed linear algebra papers in Cologne
and game development was identified as a target audience for these
library components.
I opined that without any further action to address the assertion,
those components — and an increasing proportion of the standard library
as a whole — would be rejected by a growing number of C++ users.

It is my view that the assertion forewarns of a scalability problem
that C++ must address in order to continue on its current course.

## Background

### Debug Builds

During the development cycle, it is common for C++ users to produce
binaries that are optimised for testing and debugging. These are often
called *debug builds* — to be contrasted with *release builds* which
are optimised for production use.

It is accepted that debug builds are bigger and execute more slowly
than release builds of the same program.
They may include correctness checks,
and symbol and debugging information.
They may also disable optimizations which
hamper the compiler's ability to provide helpful debugging information.

### Function Inlining

A very common optimization which causes the loss of debugging
information is *function inlining*.
Function inlining effectively removes functions
and, in doing so, removes or obscures debugging information
associated with those functions.

The lack of function inlining is one reason why
a debug build may be bigger and execute more slowly.

### Library-Based Abstractions

Unfortunately, a growing number of library-based abstractions
rely on function inlining in order to maintain zero run-time overhead.
Many libraries are affected, including the standard library.
The abstractions are characterised by
deep call trees which collapse down to efficient machine code.

### The Dilemma

Without function inlining, these abstractions incur significant
cost in terms of binary size and run-time performance.
With function inlining, the same abstractions obfuscate
stack traces and otherwise hamper the ability of tools to provide
the user with helpful debugging information.

This causes a dilemma which is felt most acutely in abstractions that
have the highest ratio of compile-time complexity to run-time code
generation.

For example, many numerics libraries offer abstractions
over fundamental arithmetic types.
A substantial amount of source code will routinely result in
[a single arithmetic instruction](https://godbolt.org/z/easvxD).
However, the problem [ranges](https://godbolt.org/z/DHshRI)
far beyond purely arithmetic abstractions.

## Problem Analysis

### One User's Solution is Another User's Problem

One way in which library designers attempt to address concerns over
performance of debug builds is to try and single out their functions
for inlining. This fails for two reasons.

Firstly, explicit inlining as an optimization hint is a mistake.
A modern tool chain does a far better job of determining
if a function is a good candidate for inlining. Many factors contribute
to this determination including: target platform, caller, build
configuration and profile guidance. Assuming the user made the right
choice on a given day (unlikely), the same choice may be wrong
tomorrow.

Secondly, the intent to inline is based on ownership of the
function. It's likely that *users* of the library DO wish for
inlining of its functions in debug builds. Conversely, *authors* of the
library DO NOT wish for inlining of the very same functions. Hence, no
annotation or keyword could possibly cover both use cases.

In short, explicit inlining is a bad tool for the wrong job.

### One of Several Problems for C++

A common feature of modern C++ functions is that they are delivered via
header files. Comparable traditional C++ and C functions would be
defined in source files, making it easy for the library author or
library user to optimize them in isolation.
 
This also makes it easy for the library user to step over them
during an interactive debugging session.
Indeed, if the user is unsure whether the function is their own, they
may habitually chose the 'step into' facility of the debugger and
automatically traverse the subsection of the call graph that is under
their control.

This paper focuses on run-time performance of debug builds
and not the quality of interactive debugging experience.
However, it is a closely-related topic
and this proposal hopes to improve it as a side effect.
It has also been tackled by [IDEs](https://www.cprogramming.com/debugging/visual-studio-msvc-debugging-NoStepInto.html)
and [GDB extensions](https://github.com/jefftrull/gdb_python_api)
suggesting that is a problem worthy of attention in its own right.

### A Niche Problem

The problem of debug build performance has a non-technical dimension. 

Firstly, it affects programs where performance of debug builds is
critical. This excludes batch programs and event-based user interfaces
where slower response to user input is not a deal-breaker.

Secondly, it only affects developers who use debuggers. There is 
[disagreement](https://twitter.com/PeterSommerlad/status/1078958027175329793)
about whether interactive debugging is even necessary in the era of
test-driven development. But it is clear that it is deemed necessary
by users in specific domains and has been for a long time.

It is plausible that developers
who suffer most from debug build performance
are not well represented within WG21.
To them, the committee appears unsympathetic.

### Somebody Else's Problem

Where the standard adds features which cause pain to users,
it adds insult to injury by describing those features
as a 'quality of implementation' issue.
That description is both accurate and inadequate.
Not only does the committee have a responsibility
to deal with the consequences of its choices.
But it also has a unique ability
to mediate between users and implementors.
Hopeful this is a role that SG15 can fulfil.

### Conclusion of Problem Analysis

The course that C++ has been following for a long time
takes it in a direction which is causing some users
an increasing number of productivity problems including:

1. slow, bloated debug builds;
2. back traces that include unwanted noise from extra-project code;
3. hard-to-step-through call graphs; and
4. slow build times.

Function inlining mitigates 1), 2) and 3)
but can also adversely affect 1), 3) and 4).
Thus the user faces a dilemma
for which we offer no satisfactory solution.
The author suggests that — aside from 4) which is an pressing issue in
its own right — it is the dilemma which deserves attention and not
individual problems, 1), 2) and 3).

## Straw Man Solution

In order to stimulate discussion around
a workable solution to the dilemma,
the following sub-section hypothesises a change to popular tool chains
which — if implementable — would provide
an implementation-specific solution
that could apply to existing source code unchanged.

The solution works by considering pre-existing information about
the origin of a function definition and using it to solve the dilemma
of whether or not to inline that function.

### Proposed Change to GCC Option, `-Og`

[gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Optimize-Options.html](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Optimize-Options.html)

`-Og`

<p style="margin-left: 40px">Optimize debugging experience.
<code>-Og</code> should be the optimization level of choice for the
standard edit-compile-debug cycle, offering a reasonable level of
optimization while maintaining fast compilation and a good debugging
experience. It is a better choice than <code>-O0</code> for producing
debuggable code because some compiler passes that collect debug
information are disabled at <code>-O0</code>.</p>

<p style="margin-left: 40px">Like <code>-O0</code>, <code>-Og</code>
completely disables a number of optimization passes so that individual
options controlling them have no effect. Otherwise <code>-Og</code>
enables all <code>-O1</code> optimization flags except for those that
may interfere with debugging:</p>

<p style="margin-left: 80px">
<code>-fbranch-count-reg  -fdelayed-branch
-fif-conversion  -fif-conversion2
-finline-functions-called-once
-fmove-loop-invariants  -fssa-phiopt
-ftree-bit-ccp  -ftree-pta  -ftree-sra
</code></p>

<p style="margin-left: 40px; color: green; text-decoration: underline">
Additionally, <code>-Og</code> enables the following optimization flags
for functions defined in system headers (i.e. defined in headers found
via <code>-isystem</code>):</p>

<p style="margin-left: 80px; color: green; text-decoration: underline">
<code>-finline-functions-called-once
-finline-functions
-finline-small-functions
</code></p>

### MSVC Option, `/Ob`

A similar MSVC facility can be envisaged with the experimental
`/external:I` switch as a substitute for `-isystem`.
This would involve a combination of switches such as

```shell
cl.exe /Od /Ob3 /external:IC:\somebody\elses\headers /IC:\my\project\headers C:\my\project\source\file.cpp 
```

where `/Ob3` is a novel function inlining option which
discriminates between 'system' (i.e. dependency) headers and 'project'
headers.

## FAQ

Q: How does the proposed tool chain enhancement help?

A: It helps by drawing a distinction between the user's functions and
   the functions of a user's dependencies. It is assumed that the user
   only wishes to debug their own code and would rather optimise
   dependency code. Dependency code should already be included in the
   translation unit via a different header search path option. The
   compiler can use that change to make the choice to inline. 

Q: Does this proposal work?

A: I have absolutely no idea. Optimising compilers are incredibly
   sophisticated and complex tools which I haven't devoted the time to 
   understand. It is entirely possible, for example, that the
   architecture of a particular compiler makes it especially difficult
   to selectively enable and disable inlining on a per-function basis.
   But even if this technique worked half of the time, I posit that it
   would improve the situation for users.

Q: Why inlining, specifically, and not other optimizations which would
   make dependency code faster?

A: For the sake of simplicity, this paper concentrates on what the
   author believes is the single most significant optimization
   technique.

## Impact On The Standard

None.

## Acknowledgements

Thanks to Matthias Kretz for providing a valuable perspective as the
author of a numerics library.